**VA Data Commons**
===================

The Veterans Affairs (VA) Data Commons supports the research and
analysis of US military Veteran medical and genomic data and aims to
accelerate scientific discovery and development of therapies, diagnostic
tests, and other technologies for improving the lives of Veterans and
beyond. The data commons supports cross-project analyses by harmonizing
data from different projects through the collaborative development of a
data dictionary, providing an API for data queries, and providing a
cloud-based analysis workspace with rich tools and resources.

Table of Contents
=================

-  `VA Data Commons <#va-data-commons>`__
-  `Table of Contents <#table-of-contents>`__
-  `Getting Started <#getting-started>`__

   -  `Login Page <#login-page>`__

      -  `VA Data Commons
         Documentation <#va-data-commons-documentation>`__
      -  `Email Support <#email-support>`__

   -  `Profile Page <#profile-page>`__

      -  `API key(s) <#api-keys>`__

-  `Data Access and Analysis <#data-access-and-analysis>`__

   -  `Workspace <#workspace>`__
   -  `Apps <#apps>`__
   -  `OHDSI Atlas <#ohdsi-atlas>`__

      -  `Steps to Generate a Cohort <#steps-to-generate-a-cohort>`__

   -  `Gen3 GWAS <#gen3-gwas>`__
   -  `Genome-Wide Association Studies (GWAS) for Quantitative
      Phenotype. <#genome-wide-association-studies-gwas-for-quantitative-phenotype>`__
   -  `Genome-wide association studies (GWAS) for a case-control
      study. <#genome-wide-association-studies-gwas-for-a-case-control-study>`__
   -  `GWAS Results <#gwas-results>`__

Getting Started
===============

**Login Page**
--------------

Users will log in with their VA PIV credentials. Start by visiting the
`login page <https://va.data-commons.org/login>`__ and sign in with your
organizational account. After successfully logging in, your username
will appear in the upper right-hand corner of the page. Click this link
for more information about using the `PIV
login <https://www.oit.va.gov/resources/remote-access/cag/windows/index.cfm?#piv>`__.

Once logged in, the user will see there are several options in the upper
right hand corner of the `home screen <https://va.data-commons.org/>`__.
In the blue bar at the top of the page, there is a link to VA Data
Commons Documentation (the page you are currently reading), Email
Support, your username and a log out button. Below these options, there
are tabs for the Workspace, the Apps, and the Profile pages. Clicking on
the VA Data Commons logo in the upper left hand corner of the screen
will always return you to the home page of the data commons.

**VA Data Commons Documentation**
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

The button for VA Data Commons Documentation takes you to this page.

**Email Support**
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

If you need help, the Email Support button allows you to send a message
to our help desk at support@datacommons.io. You may expect a response
within 2 business days.

**Profile Page**
----------------

On the `Profile page <https://va.data-commons.org/identity>`__ you can
create and save your API key.

.. raw:: html

   <!---
   [Note - Insert image of profile page here]: #
   -->

**API key(s)**
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

To download large amounts of data, an `API
key <https://va.data-commons.org/identity>`__ will be required as a part
of the `gen3-client <https://gen3.org/resources/user/gen3-client/>`__.
To create a key on your local machine, click Create API key, which will
activate a pop-up window.

.. raw:: html

   <!---
   [Note - Insert image of create API Key here]: #
   -->

Click Download json to save the credential file to your local machine.
After completion, a new entry will appear in the API key(s) section of
the Profile page. It will display the API key key_id and the expiration
date (one month after the key creation). The user should delete the key
after it has expired and create a new key. If for any reason a user
feels that their API key has been compromised, the key should be deleted
before subsequently creating a new one.

Data Access and Analysis
========================

**Workspace**
-------------

`Workspaces <https://va.data-commons.org/workspace>`__ are secure data
analysis environments in the cloud that can access data from one or more
data resources. By default, Workspaces include Jupyter notebooks and
JupyterLab, Python and RStudio, but can be configured to host virtually
any application, including analysis workflows, data processing
pipelines, or data visualization apps.

New to Jupyter? Learn more about the popular tool for data scientists on
`Jupyter.org <https://jupyter.org/>`__ (disclaimer: CTDS is not
responsible for the content).

.. raw:: html

   <!---
   [Note - Insert image of workspace page here]: #
   -->

There are five workspace options available. The options include two
versions of Jupyter Notebook Bio Python/R which employ the classic
Jupyter Notebook in two different sizes (one large, 4.0 CPU, 8192 Mi
memory, and one small, 0.5 CPU, 512 Mi memory), two versions of Jupyter
Notebook Bio Python/R (Lab Edition) which opens JupyterLab, the latest
interactive development environment for notebooks, code and data also
with the option of two sizes (one large and one small), and one
workspace option with R Studio. Click “Launch” to spin up a copy of that
VM. Launching may take several minutes depending on the size and
complexity of the workspace.

Once the VM is ready, the initial screen for the workspace will appear.
After launching, the home folders are displayed, one of which is the
user’s persistent drive (“pd”). For scripts and output that need to be
saved when the workspace is terminated, store those files in the pd/
directory. Only files saved in the /pd directory will remain available
after termination of a workspace session.

Start a new notebook by clicking “New” in the top right corner and
choose between Python 3 or R Studio as the base programmatic language.
Code blocks are entered in cells, which can be executed individually or
all at once. Code documentation and comments can also be entered in
cells, and the cell type can be set to support Markdown.

Results, including plots, tables, and graphics, can be generated in the
workspace and downloaded as files. Only files saved in the /pd directory
will remain available after termination of a workspace session.

Do not forget to terminate your workspace once your work is finished to
be mindful of the cost-intensive computational effort. Note, that
Workspaces automatically shut down after 15 minutes of idle time.

For more information about the Gen3 Workspace, refer to `Data Analysis
in a Gen3 Data
Commons <https://gen3.org/resources/user/analyze-data/>`__.

**Apps**
--------

The `Apps page <https://va.data-commons.org/analysis>`__ displays the
option of two apps, OHDSI Atlas and Gen3 GWAS. Using these Apps, a user
may perform a genomic analysis on available data from projects that they
have access to.

**OHDSI Atlas**
---------------

ATLAS is an open source software application developed as a part of
`OHDSI <https://www.ohdsi.org/>`__ community intended to provide a
unified interface to patient level data and analytics. Atlas software
used to define cohorts, typically dichotomous variables, for analysis.

ATLAS currently includes functionality for searching and navigating the
vocabulary within the OMOP Common Data Model (CDM). In addition to the
search and navigation capabilities, it also provides features to curate
and export custom sets of concept identifiers for use in cohort
definitions. These will automatically populate on the Gen3 GWAS App. In
general, ATLAS is an analytics platform that can be used to perform
analyses across one or more observational databases which have been
standardized to the OMOP Common Data Model V5 and can facilitate
exchange of analysis designs with any other organizations across the
OHDSI community.

Tutorials for the ATLAS tool can be found
`here <https://github.com/OHDSI/Atlas/wiki>`__ and the book about the
OHDSI can be found `here <https://ohdsi.github.io/TheBookOfOhdsi/>`__.
These resources contain a lot of useful information, particularly you
might find it useful to read about `Cohort
Definition <https://ohdsi.github.io/TheBookOfOhdsi/Cohorts.html#Cohorts>`__.
It is highly advisable that you familiarize yourself with these
resources before proceeding. We have also provided a brief step-by-step
guide to creating dichotomous variables here:

**Steps to Generate a Cohort**
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

**Step 1 Create a Concept Set**

Concept Sets are a list of codes created by searching the standardized
vocabulary and selecting the set of terms for your analyses. Here you
select all concepts (variables) that you would like to use for criteria
that define your study population cohort.

.. image:: _static/slide_10.png

Select Concept Sets in the menu and click the blue box for “New Concept
Set”.

.. image:: _static/slide_11.png

In the box above the tabs, enter a name for the Concept Set you are
creating.

Click the green box “Add concepts” to view the list of concept
variables.

.. image:: _static/slide_13.png

Enter the concept name or code into the search bar to find relevant
concept variables.

.. image:: _static/slide_14.png

Select desired concepts, click “Add To Concept Set”. Repeat Search and
Add steps as needed, then click “Concept Sets”.

.. image:: _static/slide_15.png

Make sure all desired concepts are included, then click the save icon to
the right of the name of the Concept Set.

To add new concepts, please use the “Add Concepts” button again as
described above.

.. image:: _static/atlas_remove_concepts.png

To delete the concepts from the concept set, select the concepts and
click on the “Remove Selected” button, then click the save icon to save
your changes.

**Step 2 Create Cohort Definition**

A cohort is a set of persons who satisfy one or more inclusion criteria
for a duration of time.

Use the concept sets to create initial events and other criteria for
defining the study population cohort. A cohort is defined as a Person
with an entry and exit date. Thus, a person can be in a cohort multiple
times if they meet the criteria.

.. image:: _static/slide_17.png

Select “Cohort Definitions” in the menu, you can begin to create a
cohort by clicking the “New Cohort” button.

.. image:: _static/slide_18.png

In the boxes above and below the tabs, enter a name and description for
the Cohort.

.. image:: _static/slide_19.png

To establish the duration for your cohort, click “+ Add Initial Event”,
then in the dropdown menu click “Add Observation”.

.. image:: _static/slide_20.png

Click the blue box “Any Observation”, select “Import Concept Set” from
the dropdown menu.

.. image:: _static/slide_21.png

Select the Concept Set you just made. This establishes your Concept Set
as inclusion criteria for your cohort.

.. image:: _static/slide_22.png

To access the table in the MVP harmonization database, click “+ Add
attribute…”, then click “Add Value as Number Criteria”.

.. image:: _static/slide_23.png

Select “Greater or Equal To”. In this specific case we added Heart
Failure concept Set and entered value “2”. This will allow for the
collection of data from the Observation table of the MVP harmonization
database.

If you would like to add additional inclusion criteria, click “New
inclusion criteria” select criteria or import another configuration. To
complete the Cohort Definition, click the green Save icon.

**Step 3 Generate Cohort**

Once created, the cohort can then serve as the basis of inputs for your
subsequent analyses. Use the cohort definition to identify how many
people are in the cohort. This is the initial number that will be used
in the GWAS app when this cohort is selected.

.. image:: _static/slide_26.png

To complete the creation of the Cohort Definition, click “Generation”,
then “Generate”.

Cohort size will be displayed under the column “People”. Use View
Reports to see if you have inclusion criteria that causes cohort
attrition.

.. image:: _static/atlas_export_cohort.png

The “Export” tab provides a text version of how a cohort was created.
Click on the “Export” tab and then on the “Copy to clipboard” to copy
the cohort’s information.

We expect that this documentation in addition to the OHDSI tutorials are
sufficient for most analyses that users will attempt. If your phenotype
and analysis variables are more complex than this documentation covers,
please contact us for consultation at craig.teerlink@va.gov

**Gen3 GWAS**
-------------

Use this app to perform a high throughput GWAS on MVP data using the
University of Washington Genesis pipeline.

Genome-wide association studies (GWAS) help scientists identify genes
associated with a particular disease (or another trait). This method
studies the entire set of DNA (the genome) of a large group of people,
searching for small variations, called single nucleotide polymorphisms
or SNPs (pronounced “snips”).

We offer two types of GWAS analysis-

**Genome-wide association studies (GWAS) for quantitative phenotype.**

**Genome-wide association studies (GWAS) for a case-control study.**

Each of these Gen3 GWAS options are available through the GWAS App, and
consists of several steps. To navigate between the steps, click the Next
or Previous box in the lower corners of the screen.

Each step displays the Attrition table at the top of the page. The
Attrition table contains information about the total population size and
sample size by ancestry for your selected cohorts and variables.

For more information about the web functionality of each step, please
refer to the Tutorial button. This tool will offer highlighted
explanations on different parts of the page.

When entering the App, a user must first select the type of GWAS from
the choices in the box on the screen.

**Genome-Wide Association Studies (GWAS) for Quantitative Phenotype.**
----------------------------------------------------------------------

Here, GWAS evaluates the statistical association between genetic
variation and a continuous phenotype. A phenotype, also called a trait,
can be any measured or observed property of an individual.

   :Tip: On each step of the workflow there is a tutorial, please click
   the icon to navigate through the tutorial

**Step 1 Select a cohort for GWAS**

In this step, you will determine the study population. To begin, select
the cohort that you would like to define your study population with. You
may only see cohorts that you have access to. Please select only one
cohort. The size of the cohort population is indicated in the right hand
side of the table. To browse the table please scroll down to the bottom.

You may also see a button to create a new cohort. This button will open
a new tab in your browser, outside of the Gen3 GWAS App and send you to
the OHDSI Atlas App.

**Step 2 Select harmonized variables for phenotypes and covariates**

In this step, you will select the harmonized variables for your study.
Please select all variables you wish to use in your model, including
both covariates and phenotype. (Note:- population PCs are not included
in this step)

You may choose as many variables as you wish in this step, with a
minimum of one, that will represent your outcome phenotype. You may
remove them later in the pipeline. Currently, only continuous variables
can be selected. To browse the table, please scroll down to the bottom.
To search the table please enter free text in the search box to search
by cohort name.

**Step 3 Select which variable is your phenotype**

In this step, you will determine your phenotype, using the selected
variables from step 2. Please choose one of the selected variables to be
the study’s phenotype.

Here you may choose your phenotype. All data are harmonized from
different projects through the collaborative development of a data
dictionary. In the right hand side of the table a missing % is
calculated. This is to reflect how many subjects of the chosen
population do not have this information available. To browse the table
please scroll down to the bottom.To search the table please enter free
text in the search box to search by cohort name.

**Step 4 Add custom dichotomous covariates**

In this step, you may add custom dichotomous covariates by selecting two
cohorts. This step is optional, and you may choose not to add any
dichotomous covariate at all. You may combine a cohort for YES and a
cohort for NO. Once cohorts are selected you may enter a name for the
covariate. To commit the changes please press ‘Add’ at the bottom (You
must ‘Add’ the variable before moving to the next screen if you want it
to be a part of your analysis). You may repeat this action as many times
as you need, or choose to not add any custom dichotomous covariates at
all. Please note that all given names must be unique.

As you add covariates you may see them populate on the right hand side
of the screen as cards. The card contains your given name at the top of
the card, and the ability to remove the created covariate at the bottom
of the card.

**Step 5 Set workflow parameters and remove unwanted covariates**

In this step, you will determine workflow parameters. Please adjust the
number of population principal components (PCs) to control for
population structure, minor allele frequency cutoff and imputation score
cutoff. You may also remove unwanted covariates. Please also choose one
ancestry population on which you would like to perform your study.

Number of PCs- Population Principal components (PCs) refer to linear
combinations of genome-wide genotyping data to control for population
structure/stratification (select up to 10 PCs)

Covariates- Please review the chosen covariates. You may remove unwanted
covariates, or go back (at the bottom of the page) to step 2 to choose
different ones.

Dichotomous Covariates- Please review the created covariates. You may
remove unwanted covariates, or go back (at the bottom of the page) to
step 4 to adjust/add different ones.

Phenotype- Please see here the phenotype chosen in step 3. To adjust
please go back (at the bottom of the page) to step 3 to choose a
different one.

MAF Cutoff- Minor allele frequency (MAF) is the frequency at which the
second most common allele occurs in a given population and can be used
to filter out rare markers (scale of 0-0.5)

HARE dropdown menu- Please choose the ancestry population on which you
would like to perform your study. The numbers appearing in the dropdown
represent the population size of your study, considering all of your
previous selections. The codes are the HARE (Hharmonized Aancestry and
Rrace/Eethnicity) codes.

Imputation Score Cutoff- This value reflects the quality of imputed SNPs
and can be used to remove low-quality imputed markers (scale of 0-1)

**Step 6 Submit GWAS Study**

In this step, you may review the metadata selected for the study, give a
name to the study, and submit the GWAS for analysis. To commit any
changes please go back to the relevant step.

**Check Submission Status and Review Results**

Once your GWAS analysis is submitted, you can check the submission
status and review the results in the “GWAS Results” App.

**Genome-wide association studies (GWAS) for a case-control study.**
--------------------------------------------------------------------

Here, the genotypes of a roughly equal number of diseased (“cases”) and
healthy (“controls”) people are compared to determine which genetic
variants are associated with the disease. Cases are encoded as ‘1’ while
controls are encoded as ‘0’ and a binary model is used.

   :Tip: On each step of the workflow there is a tutorial, please click
   the icon to navigate through the tutorial

**Step 1 Select a case cohort for GWAS**

In this step, you will begin to define the study population. To begin,
select the cohort that you would like to define as your study “cases”
population. You may only see cohorts that you have access to. Please
select only one cohort. The size of the cohort population is indicated
in the right hand side of the table. To browse the table please scroll
down to the bottom.

You may also see a button to create a new cohort. This button will open
a new tab in your browser, outside of the Gen3 GWAS App and send you to
the OHDSI Atlas App.

**Step 2 Select a control cohort for GWAS**

In this step, you will continue to define the study population. Please
select the cohort that you would like to define as your study “control”
population. You may only see cohorts that you have access to. Please
select only one cohort. The size of the cohort population is indicated
in the right hand side of the table. To browse the table please scroll
down to the bottom. To search the table please enter free text in the
search box to search by cohort name. To search the table please enter
free text in the search box to search by cohort name.

You may also see a button to create a new cohort. This button will open
a new tab in your browser, outside of the Gen3 GWAS App and send you to
OHDSI Atlas App.

**Step 3 Select harmonized variables for covariates**

In this step, you may select covariates for your study. This step is
optional, and you may choose not to add any covariate at all. Please
choose as many covariates as you wish, you may remove them later in the
pipeline. Currently, only continuous covariates are presented. All
variables are harmonized. To browse the table please scroll down to the
bottom. To search the table please enter free text in the search box to
search by cohort name.

**Step 4 Assess % missing in selected covariates**

In this step, you can review the covariates selection based on % missing
metrics. To adjust covariates please return to Step 3. If no covariates
were chosen in step 3, this step will be empty.

**Step 5 Add custom dichotomous covariates**

In this step, you may add custom dichotomous covariates by selecting two
cohorts. This step is optional, and you may choose not to add any
dichotomous covariate at all. You may combine a cohort for YES and a
cohort for NO. Once cohorts are selected you may enter a name for the
covariate. To commit the changes please press ‘Add’ at the bottom (You
must ‘Add’ the variable before moving to the next screen if you want it
to be a part of your analysis). You may repeat this action as many times
as you need, or choose to not add any custom dichotomous covariates at
all. Please note that all given names must be unique.

As you add covariates you may see them populate on the right hand side
of the screen as cards. The card contains your given name at the top of
the card and the ability to remove the created covariate at the bottom
of the card.

**Step 6 Set workflow parameters and remove unwanted covariates**

In this step, you will determine workflow parameters. Please adjust the
number of population principal components to control for population
structure, minor allele frequency cutoff and imputation score cutoff.
You may also remove unwanted covariates. Please also choose the ancestry
population on which you would like to perform your study.

Number of PCs- Population Principal components (PCs) refer to linear
combinations of genome-wide genotyping data to control for population
structure/stratification (select up to 10 PCs)

Covariates- Please review the chosen covariates. You may remove unwanted
covariates, or go back (at the bottom of the page) to step 2 to choose
different ones.

Dichotomous Covariates- Please review the created covariates. You may
remove unwanted covariates, or go back (at the bottom of the page) to
step 4 to adjust/add different ones.

HARE dropdowns- Please choose the ancestry population on which you would
like to perform your study. The numbers appearing in the dropdown
represent the population size of your study, considering all of your
previous selections. The codes are the HARE (harmonized ancestry and
race/ethnicity) codes.

MAF Cutoff- Minor allele frequency (MAF) is the frequency at which the
second most common allele occurs in a given population and can be used
to filter out rare markers (scale of 0-0.5)

HARE dropdowns- Please choose the ancestry population on which you would
like to perform your study. The numbers appearing in the dropdown
represent the population size of your study, considering all of your
previous selections. The codes are the HARE (harmonized ancestry and
race/ethnicity) codes.

Imputation Score Cutoff- This value reflects the quality of imputed SNPs
and can be used to remove low-quality imputed markers (scale of 0-1)

**Step 7 Submit GWAS Study**

In this step, you may review the metadata selected for the study, give a
name to the study, and submit the GWAS for analysis.

**Check Submission Status and Review Results**

Once your GWAS analysis is submitted, you can check the Submission
Status and Review the Results in the “GWAS Results” app.

**GWAS Results**
----------------

Use this App to view the status & results of submitted workflows. Click
the arrow in the Submitted Job Statuses box to activate the drop down
menu and see the status of your analysis. This menu will display a
history of your submitted jobs including the Run ID of your analysis,
the start time, and the finish time when the run is completed. This menu
will also display whether the analysis was a success or failed. Once
completed, you may download the results of the GWAS analysis from this
menu. By pressing the ‘Download’ link a tar.gz file will start
downloading to your computer. The file contains the following: Manhattan
plot, QQ plot, metadata file containing all of your selections,
attrition tables, and per-chromosome GWAS summary statistics.
